# Sound Effects (fx)

The sound FX currently have a fixed chain when using the Mercury standalone version in Max. The chain of effects is as following:

```
synth / sample / polySynth / loop (mono)
|
freeze (spectral freezer)
|
shift (pitchshifter)
|
envFilter (envelope modulated filter)
|
kink (distortion)
|
drive (distortion)
|
filter (low/hi/band filter with optional LFO modulation)
|
chip (downsampling)
|
comb (combfiltering)
|
squash (basic compression/distortion)
|
gain (the volume of the sound)
| >-----------------------> v
panning                     reverb (stereo reverberation)
||                          ||
double                      ||
(automated double tracking  ||
/chorus)                    ||
||  <====================== <<
lfo 
(low frequency oscillator)
||  >---------------------> vv
||                          delay (stereo pingpong delay)
||  <====================== <<
output
```

```
|  mono
-  mono
|| stereo
=  stereo
```

## reverb

Add an reverberation effect to the sound. The effect has 2 arguments, the amplitude of the reverb and the reverb-length. The amplitude is specified in floating-point linear gain and the length is a value between `0` and `20`. The default is `0.5` amplitude and `10` length.

```
fx(reverb <amplitude, optional> <reverb-length-0-19, optional>)
```
example
```java
new sample snare_909 time(1) fx(reverb 1 15)
```

## delay

Add a pingpong delay effect to the sound. The effect has 4 arguments, the left delaytime, the right delaytime, the feedback and the damping. The delaytime is specified in bar time divisions, where `0.25` (or `1/4`) is a quarter note. The feedback is specified as a value between `0` and `1`. Positive feedback is allowed and internally compressed, but watch out for your ears in any case. The damping is a lowpass filter for which the cutoff is specified between `0` and `1` where 0 means full damping, and 1 means none.

```
fx(delay <time-division> <time-division> <feedback> <damping>)
```
example
```java
new sample hat_click time(1/2) fx(delay 3/16 7/16 0.5 0.7)
```

## filter

Add a filter to the sound. This can be a static filter or a modulated filter depending on the amount of arguments you provide. The filter-type can be a `low`, `high` or `band`-pass filter. The second argument is the cutoff frequency in Hz and the third argument is the resonance between `0` and `1`. 

```
fx(filter <type> <cutoff> <resonance>)
```
example
```java
new synth saw note(0 1) shape(-1) fx(filter low 200 0.6)
```

Alternatively you can provide extra arguments to have the filter modulate between a low and high cutoff-frequency. In this case the arguments are as follows (in order): The filter-type `low | high | band`. The modulation speed in float/expression as musical time division where `0.25` or `1/4` = a quarter note. The high cutoff in Hz, the low cutoff in Hz the resonance between `0` and `1`. The modulation shape tilt between `0` and `1`, where 0 is ramp-down, 1 is ramp-up and 0.5 is triangle form. The exponential curve for the filter as floating point. 

```
fx(filter <type> <modulation> <hi-cut> <lo-cut> <res> <shape-tilt> <exponent>)
```
example
```java
new synth saw note(0 0) shape(-1) fx(filter low 1/4 100 1500 0.5 0 0.2)
```

## freeze

Create an FFT-freeze effect on the sound. This will result in a "frozen-in-time"-like sound, where the timbre is still clearly audible. The freezer is triggered at the time interval of the `time()` function. The trigger can be set with a float to give it a probability of triggering, or a ring can be provided to let the freezing occor in a rhythmic pattern. The second optional argument determines the sliding time between 2 freeze frames (in n-frames), and the third optional argument sets the amount of frames to store.

**arguments**
- {Number} -> freeze rhythm or probability (default=1)
- {Int} -> interpolation between frames (default=0)
- {Int} -> number of frames stored in freezer (default=8)

```java
ring playHarp [1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0]
ring trigger [1 0 0 0 0]

new sample harp_up time(1/4) beat(playHarp) name(harp)
	set harp fx(freeze trigger)
```

## shift

Make a time-domain pitchshifting effect to change the pitch of the sound. The first argument sets the shift in semitones (this can also be a floating-point value to create microtonal shifts). The second value sets the wet-dry ratio (default = 1) to combine the original with the shifted sound. You can change the shifting quality (higher quality sounds better but uses more cpu).

**arguments**
- {Number} -> shifting factor (positive/negative) in semitones (optional, default=-12)
- {Float} -> wet-dry mix between 0-1 (optional, default=1)
<!-- - {Name} -> shifting settings `basic`, `rhythmic`, `percussive`, `melodic`, `vocal`, `noisy` (default=basic)  -->
- {Name} -> shifting settings `basic`, `good`, `better`, `best` (optional, default=basic) 

```java
new sample violin_c time(1/4) fx(shift 7 0.5)
```

## squash

A simple compression/distortion algorithm based on a design by Peter McCulloch. Raise the amount to squash the incoming signal, first creating some kind of simple compression, but quickly introduces nice distortion harmonics.

**arguments**
- {Number+} -> input gain amount, greater than 1 (optional, default=4)
- {Float} -> compression factor greater than 0 (optional, default=0.28)

```java
new sample piano_e time(1) fx(squash 2.3)
```

## kink

A kink distortion algorithm. Creates a bend or "kink" in the audio signal.  

**arguments**
- {Number+} -> distortion amount, greater then 0 (optional, default=5)

```java
new sample violin_c time(1) fx(kink 15)
```
## drive

A distortion/overdrive/soft-clipping effect. Uses the `tanh()` algorithm.

**arguments**
- {Number+} -> distortion amount, greater then 0 (optional, default=2)

```java
new sample kick_909 fx(drive 15)
```

## lfo

Add an Low Frequency Oscillator effect to the sound. 

```
fx(lfo <time-division>)
```

## double

Add an Automated-Double-Tracking (ADT) effect to the sound. This will give the effect as if there were two of the same sounds, one left and one right.

```
fx(double)
```


## chip

Add a downsampling effect (most characterized as chiptune/8bit sound)

```
fx(chip <degrade-samplerate-0-1>)
```